<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>

<head>
</head>

<body>

<h1>
Sunday.
</h1>

<p>In the morning the river and adjacent country were covered with a dense
fog, through which the smoke of our fire curled up like a still subtiler
mist; but before we had rowed many rods, the sun arose and the fog
rapidly dispersed, leaving a slight steam only to curl along the surface
of the water. It was a quiet Sunday morning, with more of the auroral
rosy and white than of the yellow light in it, as if it dated from
earlier than the fall of man, and still preserved a heathenish
integrity:— </p>  

<blockquote>
An early unconverted Saint,
Free from noontide or evening taint,
Heathen without reproach,
That did upon the civil day encroach,
And ever since its birth
Had trod the outskirts of the earth.
</blockquote>

<p>But the impressions which the morning makes vanish with its dews, and
not even the most "persevering mortal" can preserve the memory of its
freshness to mid-day. As we passed the various islands, or what were
islands in the spring, rowing with our backs down stream, we gave names
to them. The one on which we had camped we called Fox Island, and one
fine densely wooded island surrounded by deep water and overrun by
grape-vines, which looked like a mass of verdure and of flowers cast
upon the waves, we named Grape Island. From Ball's Hill to Billerica
meeting-house, the river was still twice as broad as in Concord, a
deep, dark, and dead stream, flowing between gentle hills and sometimes
cliffs, and well wooded all the way. It was a long woodland lake
bordered with willows. For long reaches we could see neither house nor
cultivated field, nor any sign of the vicinity of man. Now we coasted
along some shallow shore by the edge of a dense palisade of bulrushes,
which straightly bounded the water as if clipt by art, reminding us of
the reed forts of the East-Indians, of which we had read; and now the
bank slightly raised was overhung with graceful grasses and various
species of brake, whose downy stems stood closely grouped and naked as
in a vase, while their heads spread several feet on either side. The
dead limbs of the willow were rounded and adorned by the climbing
mikania, Mikania scandens, which filled every crevice in the leafy bank,
contrasting agreeably with the gray bark of its supporter and the balls
of the button-bush. The water willow, Salix Purshiana, when it is of
large size and entire, is the most graceful and ethereal of our trees.
Its masses of light green foliage, piled one upon another to the height
of twenty or thirty feet, seemed to float on the surface of the water,
while the slight gray stems and the shore were hardly visible between
them. No tree is so wedded to the water, and harmonizes so well with
still streams. It is even more graceful than the weeping willow, or any
pendulous trees, which dip their branches in the stream instead of
being buoyed up by it. Its limbs curved outward over the surface as if
attracted by it. It had not a New England but an Oriental character,
reminding us of trim Persian gardens, of Haroun Alraschid, and the
artificial lakes of the East.</p>

<p>As we thus dipped our way along between fresh masses of foliage overrun
with the grape and smaller flowering vines, the surface was so calm, and
both air and water so transparent, that the flight of a kingfisher or
robin over the river was as distinctly seen reflected in the water below
as in the air above. The birds seemed to flit through submerged groves,
alighting on the yielding sprays, and their clear notes to come up from
below. We were uncertain whether the water floated the land, or the land
held the water in its bosom. It was such a season, in short, as that in
which one of our Concord poets sailed on its stream, and sung its quiet
glories.</p>

<blockquote>
"There is an inward voice, that in the stream
ends forth its spirit to the listening ear,
   And in a calm content it floweth on,
   Like wisdom, welcome with its own respect.
   Clear in its breast lie all these beauteous thoughts,
   It doth receive the green and graceful trees,
   And the gray rocks smile in its peaceful arms."

<p>And more he sung, but too serious for our page. For every oak and birch
too growing on the hill-top, as well as for these elms and willows, we
knew that there was a graceful ethereal and ideal tree making down from
the roots, and sometimes Nature in high tides brings her mirror to
its foot and makes it visible. The stillness was intense and almost
conscious, as if it were a natural Sabbath, and we fancied that the
morning was the evening of a celestial day. The air was so elastic and
crystalline that it had the same effect on the landscape that a glass
has on a picture, to give it an ideal remoteness and perfection. The
landscape was clothed in a mild and quiet light, in which the woods and
fences checkered and partitioned it with new regularity, and rough and
uneven fields stretched away with lawn-like smoothness to the horizon,
and the clouds, finely distinct and picturesque, seemed a fit drapery
to hang over fairy-land. The world seemed decked for some holiday or
prouder pageantry, with silken streamers flying, and the course of our
lives to wind on before us like a green lane into a country maze, at the
season when fruit-trees are in blossom.</p>

<p>Why should not our whole life and its scenery be actually thus fair
and distinct? All our lives want a suitable background. They should at
least, like the life of the anchorite, be as impressive to behold as
objects in the desert, a broken shaft or crumbling mound against a
limitless horizon. Character always secures for itself this advantage,
and is thus distinct and unrelated to near or trivial objects, whether
things or persons. On this same stream a maiden once sailed in my boat,
thus unattended but by invisible guardians, and as she sat in the prow
there was nothing but herself between the steersman and the sky. I could
then say with the poet,—</p>

         "Sweet falls the summer air
      Over her frame who sails with me;
      Her way like that is beautifully free,
         Her nature far more rare,
   And is her constant heart of virgin purity."

<p>At evening still the very stars seem but this maiden's emissaries and
reporters of her progress.</p>

   Low in the eastern sky
   Is set thy glancing eye;
   And though its gracious light
   Ne'er riseth to my sight,
   Yet every star that climbs
   Above the gnarled limbs
       Of yonder hill,
   Conveys thy gentle will.

   Believe I knew thy thought,
   And that the zephyrs brought
   Thy kindest wishes through,
   As mine they bear to you,
   That some attentive cloud
   Did pause amid the crowd
       Over my head,
   While gentle things were said.

   Believe the thrushes sung,
   And that the flower-bells rung,
   That herbs exhaled their scent,
   And beasts knew what was meant,
   The trees a welcome waved,
   And lakes their margins laved,
       When thy free mind
   To my retreat did wind.

   It was a summer eve,
   The air did gently heave
   While yet a low-hung cloud
   Thy eastern skies did shroud;
   The lightning's silent gleam,
   Startling my drowsy dream,
       Seemed like the flash
   Under thy dark eyelash.

   Still will I strive to be
   As if thou wert with me;
   Whatever path I take,
   It shall be for thy sake,
   Of gentle slope and wide,
   As thou wert by my side,
       Without a root
   To trip thy gentle foot.

   I 'll walk with gentle pace,
   And choose the smoothest place
   And careful dip the oar,
   And shun the winding shore,
   And gently steer my boat
   Where water-lilies float,
       And cardinal flowers
   Stand in their sylvan bowers.

<p>It required some rudeness to disturb with our boat the mirror-like
surface of the water, in which every twig and blade of grass was so
faithfully reflected; too faithfully indeed for art to imitate, for
only Nature may exaggerate herself. The shallowest still water is
unfathomable. Wherever the trees and skies are reflected, there is more
than Atlantic depth, and no danger of fancy running aground. We notice
that it required a separate intention of the eye, a more free and
abstracted vision, to see the reflected trees and the sky, than to
see the river bottom merely; and so are there manifold visions in the
direction of every object, and even the most opaque reflect the heavens
from their surface. Some men have their eyes naturally intended to the
one and some to the other object.</p>

         "A man that looks on glass,
            On it may stay his eye,
          Or, if he pleaseth, through it pass,
            And the heavens espy."

<p>Two men in a skiff, whom we passed hereabouts, floating buoyantly amid
the reflections of the trees, like a feather in mid-air, or a leaf which
is wafted gently from its twig to the water without turning over, seemed
still in their element, and to have very delicately availed themselves
of the natural laws. Their floating there was a beautiful and successful
experiment in natural philosophy, and it served to ennoble in our eyes
the art of navigation; for as birds fly and fishes swim, so these men
sailed. It reminded us how much fairer and nobler all the actions of man
might be, and that our life in its whole economy might be as beautiful
as the fairest works of art or nature.</p>

<p>The sun lodged on the old gray cliffs, and glanced from every pad; the
bulrushes and flags seemed to rejoice in the delicious light and air;
the meadows were a-drinking at their leisure; the frogs sat meditating,
all sabbath thoughts, summing up their week, with one eye out on the
golden sun, and one toe upon a reed, eying the wondrous universe in
which they act their part; the fishes swam more staid and soberly, as
maidens go to church; shoals of golden and silver minnows rose to the
surface to behold the heavens, and then sheered off into more sombre
aisles; they swept by as if moved by one mind, continually gliding past
each other, and yet preserving the form of their battalion unchanged, as
if they were still embraced by the transparent membrane which held the
spawn; a young band of brethren and sisters trying their new fins; now
they wheeled, now shot ahead, and when we drove them to the shore and
cut them off, they dexterously tacked and passed underneath the boat.
Over the old wooden bridges no traveller crossed, and neither the river
nor the fishes avoided to glide between the abutments.</p>

<p>Here was a village not far off behind the woods, Billerica, settled not
long ago, and the children still bear the names of the first settlers in
this late "howling wilderness"; yet to all intents and purposes it is
as old as Fernay or as Mantua, an old gray town where men grow old and
sleep already under moss-grown monuments,—outgrow their usefulness.
This is ancient Billerica, (Villarica?) now in its dotage, named from
the English Billericay, and whose Indian name was Shawshine. I never
heard that it was young. See, is not nature here gone to decay, farms
all run out, meeting-house grown gray and racked with age? If you would
know of its early youth, ask those old gray rocks in the pasture. It
has a bell that sounds sometimes as far as Concord woods; I have heard
that,—ay, hear it now. No wonder that such a sound startled the
dreaming Indian, and frightened his game, when the first bells were
swung on trees, and sounded through the forest beyond the plantations
of the white man. But to-day I like best the echo amid these cliffs and
woods. It is no feeble imitation, but rather its original, or as if some
rural Orpheus played over the strain again to show how it should sound.</p>

   Dong, sounds the brass in the east,
   As if to a funeral feast,
   But I like that sound the best
   Out of the fluttering west.

   The steeple ringeth a knell,
   But the fairies' silvery bell
   Is the voice of that gentle folk,
   Or else the horizon that spoke.

   Its metal is not of brass,
   But air, and water, and glass,
   And under a cloud it is swung,
   And by the wind it is rung.

   When the steeple tolleth the noon,
   It soundeth not so soon,
   Yet it rings a far earlier hour,
   And the sun has not reached its tower.

<p>On the other hand, the road runs up to Carlisle, city of the woods,
which, if it is less civil, is the more natural. It does well hold the
earth together. It gets laughed at because it is a small town, I know,
but nevertheless it is a place where great men may be born any day, for
fair winds and foul blow right on over it without distinction. It has
a meeting-house and horse-sheds, a tavern and a blacksmith's shop, for
centre, and a good deal of wood to cut and cord yet. And

     "Bedford, most noble Bedford,
     I shall not thee forget."

<p>History has remembered thee; especially that meek and humble petition
of thy old planters, like the wailing of the Lord's own people, "To
the gentlemen, the selectmen" of Concord, praying to be erected into
a separate parish. We can hardly credit that so plaintive a psalm
resounded but little more than a century ago along these Babylonish
waters. "In the extreme difficult seasons of heat and cold," said
they, "we were ready to say of the Sabbath, Behold what a weariness
is it."—"Gentlemen, if our seeking to draw off proceed from any
disaffection to our present Reverend Pastor, or the Christian Society
with whom we have taken such sweet counsel together, and walked unto
the house of God in company, then hear us not this day, but we greatly
desire, if God please, to be eased of our burden on the Sabbath, the
travel and fatigue thereof, that the word of God may be nigh to us, near
to our houses and in our hearts, that we and our little ones may serve
the Lord. We hope that God, who stirred up the spirit of Cyrus to set
forward temple work, has stirred us up to ask, and will stir you up to
grant, the prayer of our petition; so shall your humble petitioners ever
pray, as in duty bound—" And so the temple work went forward here to a
happy conclusion. Yonder in Carlisle the building of the temple was many
wearisome years delayed, not that there was wanting of Shittim wood,
or the gold of Ophir, but a site therefor convenient to all the
worshippers; whether on "Buttrick's Plain," or rather on "Poplar
Hill."—It was a tedious question.</p>

<p>In this Billerica solid men must have lived, select from year to year; a
series of town clerks, at least; and there are old records that you may
search. Some spring the white man came, built him a house, and made a
clearing here, letting in the sun, dried up a farm, piled up the old
gray stones in fences, cut down the pines around his dwelling, planted
orchard seeds brought from the old country, and persuaded the civil
apple-tree to blossom next to the wild pine and the juniper, shedding
its perfume in the wilderness. Their old stocks still remain. He culled
the graceful elm from out the woods and from the river-side, and so
refined and smoothed his village plot. He rudely bridged the stream, and
drove his team afield into the river meadows, cut the wild grass, and
laid bare the homes of beaver, otter, muskrat, and with the whetting of
his scythe scared off the deer and bear. He set up a mill, and fields of
English grain sprang in the virgin soil. And with his grain he scattered
the seeds of the dandelion and the wild trefoil over the meadows,
mingling his English flowers with the wild native ones. The bristling
burdock, the sweet-scented catnip, and the humble yarrow planted
themselves along his woodland road, they too seeking "freedom to worship
God" in their way. And thus he plants a town. The white man's mullein
soon reigned in Indian cornfields, and sweet-scented English grasses
clothed the new soil. Where, then, could the Red Man set his foot?
The honey-bee hummed through the Massachusetts woods, and sipped the
wild-flowers round the Indian's wigwam, perchance unnoticed, when, with
prophetic warning, it stung the Red child's hand, forerunner of that
industrious tribe that was to come and pluck the wild-flower of his race
up by the root.</p>

<p>The white man comes, pale as the dawn, with a load of thought, with a
slumbering intelligence as a fire raked up, knowing well what he knows,
not guessing but calculating; strong in community, yielding obedience
to authority; of experienced race; of wonderful, wonderful common sense;
dull but capable, slow but persevering, severe but just, of little humor
but genuine; a laboring man, despising game and sport; building a
house that endures, a framed house. He buys the Indian's moccasins and
baskets, then buys his hunting-grounds, and at length forgets where
he is buried and ploughs up his bones. And here town records, old,
tattered, time-worn, weather-stained chronicles, contain the Indian
sachem's mark perchance, an arrow or a beaver, and the few fatal words
by which he deeded his hunting-grounds away. He comes with a list of
ancient Saxon, Norman, and Celtic names, and strews them up and down
this river,—Framingham, Sudbury, Bedford, Carlisle, Billerica,
Chelmsford,—and this is New Angle-land, and these are the New West
Saxons whom the Red Men call, not Angle-ish or English, but Yengeese,
and so at last they are known for Yankees.</p>

<p>When we were opposite to the middle of Billerica, the fields on either
hand had a soft and cultivated English aspect, the village spire being
seen over the copses which skirt the river, and sometimes an orchard
straggled down to the water-side, though, generally, our course this
forenoon was the wildest part of our voyage. It seemed that men led
a quiet and very civil life there. The inhabitants were plainly
cultivators of the earth, and lived under an organized political
government. The school-house stood with a meek aspect, entreating a long
truce to war and savage life. Every one finds by his own experience, as
well as in history, that the era in which men cultivate the apple, and
the amenities of the garden, is essentially different from that of the
hunter and forest life, and neither can displace the other without loss.
We have all had our day-dreams, as well as more prophetic nocturnal
vision; but as for farming, I am convinced that my genius dates from an
older era than the agricultural. I would at least strike my spade into
the earth with such careless freedom but accuracy as the woodpecker his
bill into a tree. There is in my nature, methinks, a singular yearning
toward all wildness. I know of no redeeming qualities in myself but a
sincere love for some things, and when I am reproved I fall back on to
this ground. What have I to do with ploughs? I cut another furrow than
you see. Where the off ox treads, there is it not, it is farther off;
where the nigh ox walks, it will not be, it is nigher still. If corn
fails, my crop fails not, and what are drought and rain to me? The rude
Saxon pioneer will sometimes pine for that refinement and artificial
beauty which are English, and love to hear the sound of such sweet and
classical names as the Pentland and Malvern Hills, the Cliffs of Dover
and the Trosachs, Richmond, Derwent, and Winandermere, which are to him
now instead of the Acropolis and Parthenon, of Baiae, and Athens with
its sea-walls, and Arcadia and Tempe.</p>
</body>
</html>